---
layout: post-no-feature
title: "Learning to detect and combine the features of an object"
description:
category: papers
type: Paper
journal: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
pdf: suchow2013learning.pdf
tags: [letter learning, object recognition]
---

To recognize an object, it is widely supposed that we first detect
and then combine its features. Familiar objects are recognized
effortlessly, but unfamiliar objects—like new faces or foreignlanguage
letters—are hard to distinguish and must be learned
through practice. Here, we describe a method that separates detection
and combination and reveals how each improves as the observer
learns. We dissociate the steps by two independent manipulations:
For each step, we do or do not provide a bionic crutch that performs
it optimally. Thus, the two steps may be performed solely by the
human, solely by the crutches, or cooperatively, when the human
takes one step and a crutch takes the other. The crutches reveal
a double dissociation between detecting and combining. Relative
to the two-step ideal, the human observer’s overall efficiency for
unconstrained identification equals the product of the efficiencies
with which the human performs the steps separately. The twostep
strategy is inefficient: Constraining the ideal to take two steps
roughly halves its identification efficiency. In contrast, we find that
humans constrained to take two steps perform just as well as when
unconstrained, which suggests that they normally take two steps.
Measuring threshold contrast (the faintness of a barely identifiable
letter) as it improves with practice, we find that detection is inefficient
and learned slowly. Combining is learned at a rate that is
4× higher and, after 1,000 trials, 7× more efficient. This difference
explains much of the diversity of rates reported in perceptual learning
studies, including effects of complexity and familiarity.
