---
layout: post-no-feature
title: "Terms of the debate on the format and structure of visual memory"
description:
category: papers
type: Paper
journal: Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics
pdf: suchow2014terms.pdf
tags: [visual working memory, slots, resources]
---

Our ability to actively maintain information in visual
memory is strikingly limited. There is considerable debate
about why this is so. As with many questions in psychology,
the debate is framed dichotomously: Is visual working
memory limited because it is supported by only a small
handful of discrete “slots” into which visual representations
are placed, or is it because there is an insufficient supply of a
“resource” that is flexibly shared among visual representations?
Here, we argue that this dichotomous framing obscures
a set of at least eight underlying questions. Separately considering
each question reveals a rich hypothesis space that will be
useful for building a comprehensive model of visual working
memory. The questions regard (1) an upper limit on the
number of represented items, (2) the quantization of the memory
commodity, (3) the relationship between how many items
are stored and how well they are stored, (4) whether the
number of stored items completely determines the fidelity of
a representation (vs. fidelity being stochastic or variable), (5)
the flexibility with which the memory commodity can be
assigned or reassigned to items, (6) the format of the memory
representation, (7) how working memories are formed, and (8)
how memory representations are used to make responses in
behavioral tasks. We reframe the debate in terms of these eight
underlying questions, placing slot and resource models as
poles in a more expansive theoretical space.
